I've had a few different videos talking
about critique and the role of the
critic in political movements in general
specifically a course in veganism
ecology animal rights etc as in a sense
political and social movement look
there's more than one angle from which
this is interesting to discuss and
there's more than one set of
misconceptions that I think we need to
address one of the misconceptions I
would say is that people think of
criticism as something that only comes
after the fact there's something that
arrives too late in the same way that a
movie critic you know reviews a film
when it's already made and obviously
it's too late to improve that particular
film maybe you can influence the sequel
or maybe even influence other films in
the future in politics that's really not
true and this video I want to talk about
politics I'm really talking about any
positive aspiration to make the world a
better place including humanitarian work
obviously including veganism including
dietary change or public education about
what's healthy what's that collective
responsible and what's ethical in the
human diet so I'm using politics in a
very broad sense in this video not
talking strictly about lobbying City
Hall or deciding who gets elected to go
to Parliament this sort of thing many
political movements begin with critique
that's the origin of the political
movement and again we're not necessarily
talking about a protest we could be
talking about a civil society
organization we could be talking about a
charity we could be talking about
humanitarian work in the industry to
sense and I think that for this
generation it's hard to understand
because they assume that these questions
begin from a blank sheet of paper that
you start with a blank chalkboard and
then you write down a bunch of moral
principles or some lofty goal and then
you create an institution or you create
a political movement he created charity
and pursuit of that lofty goal and that
is almost never true I mean charities
don't come out of a vacuum to give you
an example of the bat it's really closer
to veganism I was inviting recently a
vegan activist to come on this channel
you know do a podcast talk about her
current worker current projects and
she's a former member of and a former
supporter of peda people who that the
treatment of animals
now I have no reason to think that she
she's turned against Heather or dislikes
but had no reason that at all but in her
years of work and involvement she's
vegan but obviously other other issues
and animal rights would have you were
also vendors to her she became aware of
a niche she became aware of an important
issue that pedda fails to address and
that's really to do with how animals
like raccoons animals that are
considered vermin are trapped and
relocated and in many cases exterminated
in the United States and it turns out
this is a field that requires quite a
large degree of technical knowledge and
really technological knowledge about the
actual traps and barriers how you manage
these wildlife populations what you do
with them when they're trapped how you
prevent them from coming back in the
city in the first place
there are all kinds of questions that
require quite a lot of research quite a
lot of book learning so you start to
develop technical expertise in this so
it starts with a critique so it's an
awareness of a blind-spot or failing
something another agency is not
addressing something another part of the
political movement is not addressing a
problem they're not solving and
ultimately pet I can't do everything
doesn't mean you hate pet it doesn't
mean you're angry at petaa say okay this
is a limitation this is some they're not
able to handle then step two is research
becoming an expert in this issue to some
extent yourself and that's maybe a
question of the video how much expertise
do you need before getting the valta
kinda thing it's a difficult question
and then of course the next steps
involved fundraising formal organization
and she has incorporated that charity
for this and she does do fundraisers and
ask for donations and does do outreach
in public education and above all else
she lobbies the government because
ultimately it's very often city
governments there was a municipal
question the local mayor's office rather
than federal state or provincial
government very often the local
governments left for this question of
how to deal with rats and uh I don't
know whatever you got in your area you
know rats and raccoons and other wild
animals to come into the city and try to
eat human garbage and try to live you
know in the spaces under human homes and
what-have-you and that create this kind
of conflict between wildlife and and
urban human populations so that to me is
a completely standard example of how
critique of how recognizing a
shortcoming
in another agency or in the in the
responsibilities of recognizing a
political blind spot in terms of the
current you know context around you of
what's what's being done what's not
being done you know gives rise to new
engagement new agencies new charities
new activism yes and you know new ways
of lobbying government influencing
public policy ultimately bottom line now
when I was involved in Southeast Asia I
saw a lot of this process going on and
when you met people who didn't go
through those first two steps every
single time was a disaster they didn't
go through the process of critique of
criticizing what already is being done
doing a survey of the services offered
in the area concerned the type of
humanitarian work concerned what have
you and then doing research into the
issue there were groups who really have
groups and individuals start people
face-to-face who read a newspaper story
about human trafficking and by human
trafficking we here really mean a form
of prostitution exploitation of women
which is illegal even within countries
where prostitution itself is legal or
has some kind of special semi legal
status it's very often with argument
here very meta social context in which
they're both legal and illegal brothels
is both legal and illegal prostitution
very complex you've got to do research
into it but I again again met both
individuals and institutions that were
set up apparently in response to you
know like a mainstream newspaper article
something with a very very low level of
information and these people just got
outraged they wrote down some kind of
moral principle on the black board they
started raising money and asking for
donations and because of the salacious
nature of the the cause the cause and
the crime involved they started taking
donations and they then waded into a
situation where they were not really
capable of understanding the context
they were working in
they weren't even capable they were
didn't give of understanding what other
agencies and charities were offering
what role was being played by public
authorities by the government by the
police and um they be met with you know
disappointment and frustration and
culturally incomprehension and in many
cases also you know violent conflict
they didn't think through the extent to
which you know if you actually kick down
the door of a broth
and confront the pimps and drug dealers
who run the place they may be pimps and
drug dealers they may be pimps who were
also involved in gambling running
illegal illegal casino illegal gambling
operations that's their livelihood
you're taking away from them and you are
not Batman you know you're some kid from
Switzerland or you know New Zealand or
America who got into your mind to
collect donations and do this and not
only are the pimps angry at you and they
may be willing to kill you they may be
with you know you've got an office with
your name on it
II hope you're not hard to find they
maybe wanted to hunt you down and kill
you for disrupting their operation or
destroying their livelihood and very
often the people who went into these
things in a completely Navy way they
didn't realize that the prostitutes
we've met and the prostitutes don't want
to be rescued as soon as they start
dealing with these people they meet the
processes the prostitutes are saying
things like no I'm not going to let you
force me to go back to the farm I grew
up on forget it I moved to the city for
a reason I want to be here
and I remember especially with Catholic
agencies Catholicism is a really bad
history with washerwomen remember seeing
a documentary about this the history
that's just within Ireland Catholic
Church in Ireland of taking what they
perceive as fallen women and forcing
them to become long dresses to do
laundry for a living a lot of these
women regardless of their story of how
they ended up in the city or ended up as
prostitutes they're suddenly in a line
of work which actually is very highly
paid and you know is not many hours of
the day and so on they're used to
earning a lot of money with a little bit
of effort and very often when they go
back to their hometown the farm or
wherever they're from they have a lot of
disposable income compared to their own
parents in everyone else and you're
talking about rescuing them by trying to
force them into a kind of you know
catholic celibate institution where
they're taking on a job that they
perceive as denigrating as beneath their
station as beneath their dignity you're
trying to force them to do laundry or
they don't want to do and which pays
next to nothing you know to work for
maybe less than minimum wage and you're
doing it because of your Western
Christian Catholic notion of morality
that you're imposing one of these people
and had a complete ignorance something
you read in Time magazine or Newsweek or
what have you
now there are a lot of interesting
angles to this it actually brings me
back
this is one of the people I talked about
this was actually a Hannah Chloe those
of you are really into the vegan
demi-monde will know Hannah Chloe's that
I met and talked to a lot of people who
were interested in getting involved in
charity work some kind of political
activism to make a positive difference I
think just because they felt outraged in
reading a newspaper article or some
really shallow you know some shallow
source information of that but they
never went through that process of doing
a survey of what the situation is what
service area
give me a critique criticism okay where
are the blind spots where were the
opportunities what is not being
addressed by the police what is not
being addressed already by these
Catholic Charities or what is the
positive difference we can make that's a
very difficult answer and it almost
always arises out of critique whether
that's the critique of peda the critique
of already existing ecological
organizations etc or it's the critique
of a complex situation like this the
role of the police the role of the pimps
the role of everything else if you're
really looking at sexual exploitation in
Cambodia and what positive difference
white foreigners who don't really speak
the language and don't really have that
kind of a game but what caused the
difference they can make difference you
can make very thorny questions not not
easily answered and not easy to be
accountable to your donors and not easy
to be morally accountable for the means
you may have to employ if you're
actually talking about hunting down
these illicit institutions and
intervening there and some it's a method
soon enough it may not just be the pimps
that imagine maybe the police also you
may find yourself an enemy of the law
whoo and I did do research on that that
demi-monde and it is truly a demi-monde
as part of my humanitarian work I did
research on those questions in Thailand
Laos and Cambodia is the number of as
part of a number of very different you
know humanitarian projects and you see
the complexity of that and you see the
sad outcomes of people who show up with
good intentions but absolutely nothing
else aside from good intentions to offer
and it's not enough so criticism in
politics in humanitarian work with again
not just protests
face politics not just electoral
politics the role of critique in trying
to make a positive difference in this
world is dynamic and it comes at the
beginning it doesn't come too late it
doesn't come after the fact like
criticism of a Hollywood film I'd say
it's part of the the CSIs formation
phase right but what's the basic thesis
hey there's some way we can make a
positive difference here whether it's
you know some poverty-stricken area of
Cambodia or its you know with what's
happening with raccoons in Detroit
Michigan whatever it is hey there's some
positive difference we can make here in
terms of how school children in Canada
are educated about eggs and dairy and
nutrition there's some way we can vote
we got to do the research we've got to
start with a critique of the existing
organizations who currently is lobbying
and influencing school boards on this
issue as vegans there's a positive aura
pratik who currently is advising the
school boards on medical information
there probably will be some agency
there's an official group of doctors who
show up once a year and do a
consultation and look over you know the
Board of Education plans and what
they're going to they're going to cover
on nutrition and maybe safety in a
number of other issues what currently is
the process and then again even look at
a group like peda maybe there are other
big you know vaguely vegan or ecological
or animal rights agencies maybe it's the
Sierra Club or something like this who
already is lobbying who already is
influencing that process what is the
role we can play where are the gaps
criticism is thought of as destructive
because it is destructive from the
perspective of people who do absolutely
nothing with their time aside from
complaining on Facebook I faced very
harsh criticism lately from guy named
Josh he uses the moniker vegan
revolution although there's nothing
revolutionary about his politics he's no
aspirations to really make any kind of a
change he said that I have no experience
with activism with organizing political
activism and that's not true I actually
think that one of the profound
differences to myself and Josh is that
my experience however limited in even
just in the City of Toronto we use none
of my experiences with Paul
it's from Asia before I really left
insert living age rooms living in the
City of Toronto organizing dissent and
protests and movements at City Hall
being involved ecological politics
federally provincially but especially at
the city level in Toronto I think that
profoundly influences the way I see
these things and the way I see and use
critique itself you don't want to start
off blind you don't want to start with a
blank chalkboard and I do think that the
passive pose of sitting and complaining
on face but I guess it is truly
passive-aggressive right that's such a
different model it's such a different
understanding of why we engage in
critique at all even just compared to
that one limited experience I have to
use one example where I was part of
organizing a real political movement
trying to prevent a number of ecological
catastrophes in the City of Toronto one
was a sewage cultivation plants one was
a fossil fuel burning power fund this
number of ecological issues within the
city you know there had to be exactly
that survey of the situation the
critique of existing institutions and
existing agencies and what they were
doing including that case political
parties and political lobby groups where
they stood on those issues then you had
to look for the gaps you to look for the
place the opportunity or a small number
of people with a small amount of money
to make it big difference critique if
used properly is productive indeed it is
indispensable to the pursuit of
political progress